---
author: Claire Dekker
order: 2
---

I have been using AI tools for six years now, and have seen them change significantly in this relatively short time. Prior to this school year, my AI use was limited to training models for very specific tasks. I never really intended to use them for anything else, until I started using Google AI Overview. For years, I had regularly googled coding questions and then frankensteined a solution for my problem using old Stack Exchange results. Without any intention to change my technique, I realized that AI Overview was doing a much better job of answering my question. I no longer need to look through any links, combine separate examples, or deal with the passive-aggressive energy of Stack Exchange. I was already a confident coder, rarely running into anything more than minor snags, but now things really had gotten noticeably smoother. However, despite benefiting from this new tool in my repertoire, I had no desire to make any other AI tools additions to my life. I saw people around me using AI frequently for lots of different tasks, but felt a lot of hesitation and skepticism about using AI for things other than training models like an old-school data scientist. This class changed that for me. A bit.

Before this class, AI in a classroom setting was limited to lessons about training AI models, but restricted otherwise. This was the first time I had an instructor allow AI use for help with assignments in general. Since this was such a change, I decided to give it a shot for tasks I normally would not have, like summarizing papers in reading assignments. I took some trial and error to figure out how to do this effectively. First of all, it took some experimentation to get the AI model to give anything other than an overly terse barebones summary. I do not want a 20 page paper summarized into just ten lines! Secondly, I did not fully trust the AI to understand key findings, so I would always double check anything that stuck out to me for the AI summary.  This was of course important to do, as there were examples where the AI decided to summarize a related but completely different paper. It also took some trial and error to figure out which model did the best job of summarization. After benefitting from these new AI tools, I am starting to feel less resistant and more curious about what other ways AI could fit into my workflow.

The very first topic, "AI's impact on scientific production" changed how I think about AI the most. There are other topics I feel more strongly about overall, such as bias in AI, but the course did not strongly change how I already thought about it. As someone still learning a lot and settling into a science production focused role, this topic really convinced me I need to start experimenting with AI more and getting out of my comfort zone to avoid falling behind. I am yet to try using tools like codex or claude code, and also yet to experiment with agents for helping with tasks. This chapter convinced me the clock is ticking, and I do not want to be left in the dust.

While working on the project proposal slides with Shuchi, I was searching for some simple images to accompany the text on the slides, just something symbolic to elevate the visual experience. Shuchi then showed me an image she generated using AI of a full diagram of our process explaining everything clearly in a visually pleasing way. I was very surprised to see this, and felt I had been underestimating the capability of some of these tools. Though I have not put these into practice myself yet, I am sure I will soon enough. Technical presentations can be very challenging both in terms of clear explanation and audience engagement/attention, I think these images added a lot to our presentation in both of these ways.

I hope that in the future, I will be able to spend less time on tedious coding tasks, and more time thinking about concepts and theory behind what I am working toward. I think this is likely already possible, I just need to work on my skills. Additionally, I hope that I am able to tell when AI could present ethical concerns during my use. I for one will hopefully never be swayed to use AI for things like reviewing resumes while looking for a new hire.

I did feel some ethical dilemmas popping up here and there throughout this course. Even the first time I asked an AI model to summarize a paper from the reading list, I felt an immediate tinge of guilt, like I had crossed over to the darkside. However, once I realized that there was some skill involved in getting the AI model to work how I wanted, and that it was indeed allowed in this course, it slowly started to feel more normal. I still worry about what it would feel like using AI to help me write English though. This assignment for instance, I am sure many people will use AI to help them write it, and all the power to them, for me personally though, something about would feel wrong. I am not sure if this is necessarily a feeling of ethics, or just that I take a lot of pride in my writing and using AI would be betraying my own style, but as of yet it is just not something I am comfortable doing.

Overall, I am excited and grateful a course like this has been made enough of a priority that students can take it for non-elective credit. I think that too points to how much beliefs about AI have already changed in the public consciousness. We are reaching a stage where engineers are starting to realize there is more to education than just math, programming, and other very technical topics. Personally, I think engineers should have realized this decades ago, but I thank AI for accelerating the process a little bit. I hope in the near future, we will see courses like this as well as courses like "Ethics in Engineering" become widespread. For too long we have shielded engineers from believing their creations could harm individuals or even humanity.
